---
layout: post
title: Using Renovate Bot in Azure DevOps
author: Tomasz Cielecki
comments: true
date: 2024-01-11 12:00:00 +0100
tags:
- ci
- xamarin
- nuget
---

I have been spoiled by the dependabot on GitHub, which helps keeping NuGet and other packages up to date. However, dependabot is not easily available in Azure DevOps. Again, the Open Source Community to the rescue! After asking around on social media, my friends [Martin Björkström][martin], [Mattias Karlsson][mattias] and [Pascal Berger][pascal] let me know of the existence of [Renovate bot][renovate]. The purpose of this bot is to periodically to update the dependencies that you use in your projects. It has loads of plugins for all sorts of package systems, like NPM, NuGet, PIP and many more. Probably, anything you think of, it has support for it or it can be configured to work with it.

[Pascal][pascal] conveniently let me know of a Docker image you can use in your pipelines to run renovate. This docker image comes with the packages pre-installed, such that you just need to execute renovate. This is nice, because then you do not need to install the renovate npm package on every pipeline run.

## Configuration

To configure renovate, you will want to create a `config.js` file, here you can add stuff like private NuGet feeds, rules about which labels to apply on PRs and much more. For my usage, I need access too a private NuGet feed, and want to apply a label `dependencies` and a work item on every PR that renovate creates:

```javascript
module.exports = {
  hostRules: [
    {
      hostType: 'nuget',
      matchHost: 'https://pkgs.dev.azure.com/<org-name>/',
      username: 'user',
      password: process.env.NUGET_TOKEN
    }
  ],
  repositories: ['<project>/<repository>'],
  azureWorkItemId: 12345,
  labels: ['dependencies']
};
```

For private NuGet feeds, you need to add [`hostRules`](https://docs.renovatebot.com/configuration-options/#hostrules), to let renovate know how to authenticate with the NuGet feed. For Azure DevOps Artifacts, you can unfortunately not just use the `System.AccessToken` in the pipeline, so you need to create a Personal Access Token (PAT), with permission to read the package feed.

You can have renovate create PRs for one or more repositories, provide a list of repositories you want it to run on. You can quickly deduct this from the URL for your repo, which will be in the format: `https://dev.azure.com/<organization>/<project>/_git/<repository>`. Each repository you want to be scanned you add like: `<project>/<repository>`.

On my repositories, I have branch protection enabled and have a rule that work items must be linked to each PR. So for this I have created a work item, which I simply use for each renovate bot Pull Request.

That is it for the configuration.

## Pipeline definition

With the configuration in place, you can now set up a pipeline to run renovate based on a schedule. I have used the example renovate suggest, running every night at 3.

This pipeline is using the docker container [Pascal Berger][pascal] let me know exists. So every step after specifying container will run inside of that.

The `env` argument `NUGET_TOKEN`, is what the password for the `hostRule` for the NuGet feed above will be replaced with. In my case it is a Personal Access Token (PAT) that only has access to the private NuGet feed. The `GITHUB_COM_TOKEN` is used to get release notes for Pull Request descriptions when renovate creates such.

```yaml
schedules:
- cron: '0 3 * * *'
  displayName: 'Every day at 3am (UTC)'
  branches:
    include: [develop]
  always: true

trigger: none

pool:
  vmImage: 'ubuntu-latest'

container: swissgrc/azure-pipelines-renovate:latest

steps:
- bash: |
    npx renovate
  env:
    NUGET_TOKEN: $(NUGET_PAT)
    GITHUB_COM_TOKEN: $(GITHUB_TOKEN)
    RENOVATE_PLATFORM: azure
    RENOVATE_ENDPOINT: $(System.CollectionUri)
    RENOVATE_TOKEN: $(System.AccessToken)
```

With this, you should be good to go! First time renovate runs, it will create a pull request with a `renovate.json` file. Merge it and it will from now on create Pull Requests with dependency updates! Neat!

This works in many environments. Refer to the [renovate documentation][renovate] for more info.

[martin]: https://mastodon.social/@bjorkstromm "Martin on mastodon.social"
[mattias]: https://mastodon.social/@devlead "Mattias on mastodon.social"
[pascal]: https://mastodon.social/@pascalberger "Pascal on mastodon.social"
[renovate]: https://docs.renovatebot.com/ "Renovate docs"
